What if someone asks you
What about historical characters?
Or real people based on a true story,
for example?
These are real people
and they have biographies.
Some biographies are so thick
since they did a lot of things.
Now how will you translate that,
or you just won't dramatize their life
onstage or on film or whatever?
What I always say is that
you're not reviving the person herself,
just the memories
or what we know of that person.
Since she's dead,
and we've already
summed up her experiences.
For example,
she had brilliant contributions
that's why you chose
to write about her.
That's what we reinforce,
and if that's what
you want to dramatize
that'll be the context
of the whole play.
If you notice, there are many plays and films
about Jose Rizal, for example.
Rizal's life is pretty complicated.
There's Rizal who threw his slipper
when he was young,
Rizal who listened to his mother's story
about a moth,
but there's also a
Rizal in Europe
who wrote a novel
and fought with fellow Illustrados
for freedom and denouncement of the friars,
but there's also a Rizal in Dapitan,
a Rizal who fell in love
with Josephine Bracken,
with Leonor Rivera,
and a Rizal who fought
to maintain their land in Calamba.
All of this is just one person.
Now if you dramatize that,
it might take a month
to show his life
Since he lived for 35 years.
What's a month, right?
So what'll happen
is you have to select
what's significant to the story
you're writing about Rizal.
And since you did that,
you didn't bring
the real person back.
I don't know anyone
other than Jesus who can do that.
You made Rizal into a character
because the real Rizal is dead.
Since you made him
into a character,
it doesn't mean he won't
seem like a 3D character.
You'll create an illusion.
This is where your magic comes in.
How will you make him feel real
without acquiring all his actual traits?
The most important thing
is for you to choose
what will help in making
Rizal's story progress.
Rizal's childhood experience
about the moth story could be included.
He could remember that memory
standing before the firing squad.
Because it'd be weird
if at that moment
what he remembered was his memory
about the slipper he threw out the ship.
It's not relevant to the situation.
That's what I mean.
That's why it should be clear to you,
the difference between the two,
character and human being.
I'll give you an example,
I assume you also watch films,
from one historical character,
Emilio Aguinaldo.
There have been
several films made
where he was shown,
not necessarily as the protagonist.
Although there are films
where he's the protagonist.
In fact, there's a musical
about his life,
and a play that Nick Joaquin wrote
where he exposed Aguinaldo's
deep relationship with his mother.
In all of the portrayals of Aguinaldo,
he was shown as an honorable man.
The reason for the Philippine revolution's
victory and its collapse,
which was also implied
to have not been his fault.
His belief that it is for the country.
But there are films
that show the complete opposite.
In the films that depict him
as kind and noble,
they show other characters
who were allegedly his rivals
in a very negative light.
For example, General Luna.
He was depicted as someone
who had no qualms shooting anyone.
While in the film that showed
Aguinaldo's weakness and depravity,
General Luna's character
was portrayed as someone hotheaded,
but not someone who'd kill
innocent people without weapons.
He killed a chicken in rage,
but not a person.
In fact, it coud be that the writers
of those two versions
only had one historical source as reference.
A small anecdote that someone heard
that was interpreted differently.
So we go back to the fact
that your material is already there.
And the writers' interpretation of it is what will manifest in their writing.
So will it deviate
from the material?
Not really.
In fact, when it's based on a true story
you need to conduct research on it.
And in your research,
you must find the different versions,
especially since there are many
versions of history.
Especially in Phillipine history.
There's a Bonifacio
who's very honorable,
while there's a Bonifacio who's an
inventor and a conman and so on.
There are many versions.
Now if you're a dedicated writer,
you'll sift through everything.
All the available source materials.
If there are relatives,
you have to interview them.
From there,
you'll figure out
what historical facts are,
more or less,
what historical conjectures are,
and what are unknown.
The gap between
the conjecture and the unknown
is where you can
make something up
to connect one historical fact to another.
That's not a diversion,
but an interpretation.
For example, in the film “JFK,”
there's a director who said
this is what happened
to the president of America.
He was the victim of a conspiracy.
In reality, there are many versions.
There's a version
that will attack that perspective.
But that's the interpretation
that the film chose.
It's the same
whether this is Aguinaldo's film
or General Luna's film.
The writer has
a position on the matter.
And she will stand by that position.
And that stance will strengthen
if she can convince the audience
that what she showed is accurate
or if the character
was depicted accurately.
Again, it's important to know
that characters in plays and films
are not real people.
Because if it's historical,
the actual people are already buried.
What we'll see
are the different versions of the person.
There's a bad aspect, a good aspect,
and there are excuses
and celebrations of honor.
It's the same with others,
even if it's not historical
like a news event,
even a story about a gangster
or a couple who got into a bloodbath.
What's most important
is the writer's interpretation of the story
What else can she say
that hasn't been said before?